---
title: Why Celebrate Christmas?
description:
  Most people celebrate Christmas in one way or another, but do they truly
  understand the reason why we should celebrate Christmas? Is Christmas
  just a commercial holiday, or is there more to it than that?
date: "2023-12-25"
---

I'm writing this post on the morning of December 25th, the day many know as
Christmas. On this day, many young children will excitedly leap out of
their beds in their pajamas and run to their living room to see all the
gifts under the tree, perhaps waking their parents who may still be trying
to get some rest before the long day. Today, families and friends will
gather together to share a meal, often involving abundant food and ample
conversation. As the day winds to a close, we will once again start
thinking about the challenges we face in life from the challenges at work,
physical ailments, monetary struggles, loneliness, isolation, and more. As
the following days come and go, the joy we had during those early hours on
Christmas will be forgotten.

Is there really a point to this all? Is Christmas merely a reminder of what
life would be like if we lived in a fairly tale where every day was joy and
happiness? Why should we go out of our way to give gifts, or share in our
valuable time? Or why bother celebrating a little baby who was born
thousands of years ago? How does that impact me today?

I suspect many people have asked themselves these type of questions at one
point in their life. And yet, year after year, most people will continue to
celebrate Christmas. I'd like to share with you today the reason why I
celebrate Christmas, and the reason why you can have true joy at Christmas
time.

It all started many years ago with two gardeners. These two, a husband and
wife, found themselves tending a very special garden, and they had a very
close relationship with the owner of the garden. At first, they enjoyed
peace and harmony as they tended to the garden as the owner instructed them
to. Though they were given great freedom and responsibility, the two
eventually did the one thing the owner of the garden expressly instructed
them not to do and in that act of disobedience, they lost their positions
as caretakers of the garden and were cast out of the garden, this place
they so loved to be.

As the couple made a new life for themselves, they soon had children and
saw their two boys grow and become excellent hunters and farmers. However,
their disobedience in the garden had created a precedent for their children
and in an act of rage and great jealousy, their older son murdered their
younger son.

In the many generations that followed, the descendants of this couple would
become kings, religious leaders, military generals, and many other powerful
positions where they lived. And yet with all this power and might, they
fell into the same problems of greed, jealously, murder, and evil intents
that their ancestors had faced.

In case you are wondering, this story I'm telling is the history of the
world starting all the way back with Adam and Eve, the first two people on
earth that God, the owner of the garden entrusted to tend his garden. Their
disobedience brought sin into this world, and as a result, their children
and descendants began the long and painful history of the world filled with
murder, greed, jealousy, rivalries, theft, and so many more evils. These
evils are what still plague our world today which you and I experience on a
daily basis as we not only are the recipients of evils, but we too are the
cause of evils.

So why do I bring this up on Christmas day? Seems like a real downer? In a
way it is, but Christmas only makes sense when we first understand the
state of our world and the condition of our souls. Everyone, including you
and I are born into this world with sinful and wicked hearts. That is why
roughly 2000 years ago, Jesus Christ came to this earth as a human, born in
a miraculous way. Throughout his life, Jesus called people to repent, turn
from their evil ways, and follow him. Eventually, the religious leaders of
the day sentenced him to death, though he had done nothing deserving of
death. While Jesus hung upon the cross on which he was crucified, he took
the full weight of the sins of the world upon himself and he, the only
person to ever live a life free from sin, paid the price for our sins.
Three days later, he rose from the dead showing that death has no power
over him and that sin was defeated.

As a result of this act, Jesus made a way for you and I to be reconciled to
God. However, the sacrifice of Jesus is not applied unconditionally, you
and I must repent of our sins, and turn our lives to Jesus, putting
ourselves in subjection to him. There is only one way to be made right with
God, and that is through Jesus. I pray that today you will not harden your
heart, but that you will drop to your knees in repentance, putting your
faith and trust in the only one who can bring life and peace.
