---
title: My Journey to Become a Staff Software Engineer
description:
  A common question I hear from junior-level software engineers is what it takes
  to advance in their career as software engineers. In this article, I discuss
  my journey to becoming a staff software engineer and what I learned along the
  way.
date: "2022-02-01"
---

This week, I begin my new position at [Widen](https://www.widen.com) as a staff
software engineer with a focus on JavaScript engineering and developer
experience. As I reflected on my career journey and what I learned to make it to
this point, I wanted to share my journey and learnings to help other developers
advance their careers and become better software engineers. In this article,
I'll outline the 9 most important lessons I learned in the last 5 years I've
spent as a software engineer.

## TLDR

1. [Try Things Out](#try-things-out)
1. [Teach What You Learn](#teach-what-you-learn)
1. [Read Documentation](#read-documentation)
1. [Get Good at Google](#get-good-at-google)
1. [Relentlessly Improve Efficiency](#relentlessly-improve-efficiency)
1. [Chase Your Passion](#chase-your-passion)
1. [Stay Humble](#stay-humble)
1. [Embrace your team's norms](#embrace-your-team's-norms)
1. [Challenge the Status Quo](#challenge-the-status-quo)

## Try Things Out

One of the best ways to learn something is just trying it out to see what you
learn. So much of what I have learned is a result of experimenting with new
languages and frameworks; trying new ways of architecting applications; and
taking inspiration from other developers and applying it to your own projects.
The key here is "trying". You can learn so much if you give things a try, even
if you decide you didn't like it and you throw it away. I've started so many
projects and never completed them because completing them wasn't the point,
rather I was having fun trying new approaches to problems that I've solved many
times to see if I can find a better way.

## Read Documentation

It often shocks me how often I see engineers asking questions or failing to
understand concepts when there are so many amazing sources of documentation that
clearly explain these things. You can learn so much by reading documentation,
even if you aren't looking for a specific answer to a question. In fact, this is
where some of the best learnings come as you discover better ways of doing
something that you may not have known were possible!

Now, I know what you are thinking, reading documentation sounds boring. That can
certainly be the case, so set yourself small and attainable goals so you don't
burn out from reading too much documentation. For the past year, I've set a goal
to read one page of documentation (or 5 minutes worth) every workday. Five
minutes is such a small commitment, but you'd be surprised how much
documentation you can read in a year when you do it every day!

## Get Good at Google

This might sound silly, especially when many companies (including mine) don't
allow using Google during coding interviews, but learning how to research
problems is a very important skill to becoming a more effective engineer. I
frequently see junior-level developers who when faced with a problem they can't
figure out, will quickly go to a more experienced engineer to ask why their code
isn't working.

While I always encourage reaching out to more experienced developers for help,
overusing those resources can do two things. First, it limits the learning
potential as getting a quick answer is quickly forgotten while taking the time
to research a problem is often better retained. Second, if you overload senior
engineers with questions, they will eventually get frustrated that you aren't
taking the time yourself to research the issue. Senior engineers want to see
junior engineers grow, and learning how to research and discover solutions is
one of the foremost ways you can do this.

To be clear, I'm not suggesting that you don't ask **any** questions to senior
engineers, rather I'm suggesting to spend more time learning and researching on
your own before you ask questions. There will always be those tough questions
that you just can't figure out, and that's a great time to get some help from a
more experienced engineer. Eventually, when you become the senior engineer,
people will be asking you questions and you may no longer have a more senior
engineer to lean on, so practice these skills now!

## Teach What You Learn

As you learn and grow as a software engineer, one of the best ways to reinforce
and deepen your knowledge is by teaching others what you have learned. This is
not anything new that other people haven't already figured out, but it certainly
is true. When I am preparing to teach a concept, even if it is a simple Slack
message to my teammates, it introduces an opportunity for me to ensure my
knowledge of the subject is complete and accurate. The last thing I want to do
is make and spread false claims or information, so as a result teaching becomes
an opportunity to ensure my knowledge is accurate, which often brings with it
new information I may not have known before.

Keep in mind, teaching doesn't need to be a lecture in front of your whole
engineering department at work. In fact, it doesn't even have to be a speech, it
can be a simple Slack message with a new tip you learned or a mention of a more
efficient process on a Zoom call. These methods of teaching require far less
preparation while still resulting in deepening your knowledge and helping your
coworkers to also improve their skills.

## Relentlessly Improve Efficiency

As you advance to higher levels of software engineering, you will solve more
complex problems that require more time and mental energy. As you do, you will
be limited by two factors: how quickly you can develop solutions to these
problems and how quickly you can implement these solutions. Improving the
efficiency of developing solutions generally comes with time and experience
making it more difficult to artificially speed up, but the opposite is true of
improving the efficiency of implementing solutions.

While certainly not the only factor in efficiency, how you type and your typing
speed are important factors to efficiency. While software engineers do not
simply type for 8 hours straight every day, we do type a lot, so improving your
typing skills will have a positive impact on your overall efficiency. Not only
that, but if you improve not only your typing speed but also your typing method
you will find yourself wasting less mental energy thinking about typing, and
instead you can use that energy to think about the problem you are trying to
solve.

There are so many other ways to improve efficiency, but rather than making this
section huge, here are some of my top tips.

- Learn keyboard shortcuts to reduce time wasted moving between your mouse and
  keyboard.
- Prefer CLIs over GUIs. While GUIs are nicer to look at and use, CLIs are often
  more efficient. For example, with some configuration, I can manage my Git
  repositories far quicker via the command line than I can via VS Code's
  built-in Git client.
- Automate as much as you can. Setup a GitHub action to automatically update
  dependencies every other week, create lint rules to enforce coding standards,
  or create recurring reminders of common tasks. Anything you can do to reduce
  what you have to remember and do will improve your efficiency.
- For macOS users, replace Spotlight with [Raycast](https://www.raycast.com) or
  [Alfred](https://www.alfredapp.com) which both provide more functionality and
  offer means of customizing with extensions or workflows to automate common
  tasks.

## Chase Your Passion

The world of software engineering is vast and varied. You can dive into
low-level programming with Rust and C, data science with Python and R, web
application development with JavaScript and TypeScript, and so many more areas.
Due to the wide breadth of the space, it is not feasible to truly excel in every
area and so it is important to specialize in a subset of the overall field based
on what you are passionate about. For me, that is web JavaScript engineering and
developer experience, but what is it for you?

As you grow, explore different areas to find where your passion lies so you can
hone your skills and find more enjoyment in what you do every day. Don't just
pick the most loved language on the StackOverflow annual survey or the language
that pays the most, find what you love doing, and do that. If possible, use time
outside of work to build side projects either to explore new technologies or
deepen your knowledge of existing technologies you use.

## Stay Humble

The more experience you get as a software engineer, the easier it will become to
be prideful of your knowledge, position, experience, salary, you name it. Fight
this and stay humble. Pride will not only cause you to lose respect from your
coworkers, which is vitally important as a senior engineer and a leader, but it
will also stunt your continued growth and learning. If you think you have it all
figured out and know everything you need to know, you will stop learning and
stagnate at your current level of knowledge. However, if you remain humble, and
remember that not only do you have much to learn but also that every one of your
coworkers, regardless of seniority, can teach you something, you will unlock the
door to continued growth and learning.

## Embrace Your Team's Norms

Since starting at Widen 3 years ago, I have moved around to different teams
quite a bit. During some of the earlier transitions, I had a tendency to come to
the team making all sorts of suggestions based on "what I did on my other team"
or "what I did at my last job". While suggestions like this are not necessarily
bad, they make it significantly more difficult to build respect with your team
as they see your suggestions as a challenge to how they work, what they have
built, etc. This can cause others on the team to quickly become defensive rather
than being open to your ideas.

What I've found to be much more effective is to embrace the norms of a team when
joining them. This allows you to more easily see why they do what they do
including the benefits of their process and approaches. As you embrace your
team's norms, you will gain their respect far quicker which in turn will give
you the ability to suggest improvements that will likely be taken much better by
your team. Not only that, but often you will find that some of the things that
were so important when you first joined might not be as important as you think
after spending a little time on your new team.

## Challenge the Status Quo

The final lesson I'll share in this article is to challenge the status quo.
Being a highly effective software engineer involves challenging processes and
decisions rather than blindly following the direction set by others. While this
may sound contrary to my last point and very rebellious, when done properly, it
can have a great positive impact. The key is knowing what to challenge. For
example, at my work, UX decisions are something I often challenge. Asking why a
design was created the way it was, suggesting simpler alternatives, or
explaining technical reasons why a design should be reviewed. Be careful though,
as your goal should not be to challenge for the sake of challenge, rather your
goal should be to make the best possible software for your customers. If you are
careful in how you challenge the status quo, you will likely find that others on
your team appreciate your challenges and feedback.

Thanks for reading! I hope you have found this article helpful and if you have
any comments, feel free to share them with me on Twitter or GitHub!
