---
title: Why Celebrate Christmas?
description:
date: "2023-12-25"
---

I'm writing this post on the morning of December 25th, the day many know as
Christmas. On this day, many young children will excitedly leap out of their
beds in their pajamas and run to their living room to see all the gifts under
the tree, perhaps waking their parents who may still be trying to get some rest
before the long day. Today, families and friends will gather together to share a
meal, often involving abundant food and ample conversation. As the day winds to
a close, we will once again start thinking about the challenges we face in life
from the challenges at work, physical ailments, monetary struggles, loneliness,
isolation, and more. As the following days come and go, the joy we had during
those early hours on Christmas will be forgotten.

Is there really a point to this all? Is Christmas merely a reminder of what life
would be like if we lived in a fairly tale where every day was joy and
happiness? Why should we go out of our way to give gifts, or share in our
valuable time? Or why bother celebrating a little baby who was born thousands of
years ago? How does that impact me today?

I suspect many people have asked themselves these type of questions at one point
in their life. And yet, year after year, most people will continue to celebrate
Christmas. I'd like to share with you today the reason why I celebrate
Christmas, and the reason why you can have true joy at Christmas time.

It all started many years ago with two gardeners. These two, a husband and wife,
found themselves tending a very special garden, and they had a very close
relationship with the owner of the garden. At first, they enjoyed peace and
harmony as they tended to the garden as the owner instructed them to. Though
they were given great freedom and responsibility, the two eventually did the one
thing the owner of the garden expressly instructed them not to do and in that
act of disobedience, they lost their positions as caretakers of the garden and
were cast out of the garden, this place they so loved to be.

As the couple made a new life for themselves, they soon had children and saw
their two boys grow and become excellent hunters and farmers. However, their
disobedience in the garden had created a precedent for their children and in an
act of rage and great jealousy, their older son murdered their younger son.

In the many generations that followed, the descendants of this couple would
